#summary How to setup Frege in NetBeans

= Introduction =

Frege is not natively supported in NetBeans, so features like syntax highlighting or auto completion won't work. Nevertheless you can use NetBeans as IDE for Frege, if you don't mind some rough edges.

= Preperation =

You should have installed the latest version of NetBeans and the Java 7 JDK. Further, you should prepare the future main module of your project (a "hello world" output will do). 

Create the project directory, and add two subdirectories lib and src.

Download the current frege3xxx.jar, rename it to frege3.jar and put it in the lib directory.

Put the main module in the correct place in the src directory, e.g. if the module is foo.bar.Test, put the Test.fr file in ./src/foo/bar.

= Creating the NetBeans Project =
 
Select "File" -> "New Project" -> "Java Project with Existing Sources". Name the project as you like, and select the proper project directory. In the next page, set the source folder to the prepared src directory.

= Configuring the Project =

Go to "Project Properties". 

In "Sources", select the source / binary format JDK 7 and the encoding to UTF-8. Select the "Includes/Excludes" dialog. Add "**/*.class,**/*.java" as excludes.

In "Libraries", select the "Java Platform JDK 1.7" and add lib/frege3.jar. 

In "Run", add your prepared main module as main class (e.g. if you had prepared Test.fr for the module foo.bar.Test, enter this)

= Modifying the Build.xml =

Open the file build.xml in your project directory. Go to the end of the file. Add the following text *before* the closing `</project>` tag:

{{{
    <target name="-pre-compile">
     <java jvm="XXX" jar="${basedir}/lib/frege3.jar" dir="${basedir}/src">
        <arg value="-make"/>
        <arg value="-fp"/>
        <arg value="."/>
        <arg value="YYY"/>
     </java>
   </target>
}}}

Replace XXX by the path to the Java 7 JDK, e.g. "c:\Program Files\Java\jdk1.7.0\bin\java". Replace YYY by the path of your main module inside the src directory: E.g. if your main module is foo.bar.Test, then it should be in src/foo/bar/Test.fr, and YYY should be "foo/bar/Test.fr"

= Running the Project =

The compile step of Frege is performed by "clean and build" the project in NetBeans. This should generate the necessary files (or generate some error output). If compilation was successful, you can run the project as usually.


